---
layout: post
title: "First Journal Entry"
date: 2026-03-02
---
For my first journal entry, I want to reflect on an encounter I recently had that made me feel validated and raised my morale and confidence level to where I used to be. I was recently shortlisted for an interview at a company that I had previously attempted to join, and consider one of the best career moves I can make if I get the chance. Because the process is yet to be finalized, I will name the company X. But know that it trades oil commodities.

I have always been in tune with the quantitative trading space, whether it is listening to different podcasts, reading blogs and Substacks about it, or following people in that career on LinkedIn. Since I was introduced to the career path of a quant, I was very intrigued and have pointed my growth toward that area of jobs, trying to get the necessary educational background for it, hoping one day I can make the switch. But these careers are very competitive, and the floor for getting in was always very high. In my current situation, no matter how much I learn and how much I try to gain the appropriate experience, I will not compete with someone who has a PhD in astrophysics backed up with 15 years of experience in the quant space, or against an INSEAD graduate with all the right connections and currently the global head of a trading desk in Switzerland.

Nevertheless, I kept learning because the topic interests me. All my knowledge pursuits post my bachelor’s, and post getting my job in oil and gas, have been out of curiosity and interest, so if it did not yield a specific career path I wouldn’t mind. Furthermore, my career progression is going smoothly and fast. During my 7 years in ADNOC, I have progressed and been promoted relatively fast and proved very valuable to any team I have joined. But my internal conflicts about corporate culture have been brewing and increasing, resulting in several confrontations with my manager.

The skillset I have and like to build on is of little value to them, and the skillset I despise and have been avoiding is what they crown. Technical analysis and problem solving are being replaced by color theory and corporate talk, mathematical modeling is replaced with PowerPoint slides, and being direct and honest is not the best way to convey an idea. Due to a recent promotion opportunity, I felt at a crossroads: Do I let go of my ideals and way of thinking in order to be promoted, and embrace the new skillset that I know I can master but don’t want to? Or do I remain as I am and lose this promotion, but will be sleeping well and hoping one day I get the recognition I believe I deserve? After constant thinking, I thought I should grow up and be a responsible father and husband and get this promotion. A job is a job after all; there was never a promise of it being fulfilling and fun. It needs to pay the bills.

Due to being involved in a Talent Accelerator program, my resume was shared with Company X along with 20 others. I was shortlisted to proceed to the first round of interview with X's HR, and passed the initial interview along with 7 colleagues. The 7 CVs were shared with the global heads of Company X, who chose 3 to interview, and I was among them. The interviewers were the Global Head of Trading (GHT), Global Head of Middle Office (GMO), SVP of Operations, and an HR representative.

Prior to the interview, I was approached by plenty of people warning me not to raise expectations and to expect the worst. Saying this is the usual scenario with Company X: from 40 nominees, 2 reach the final round and either 1 or none is selected. And even if they were selected, they would join the not-so-glamorous part of the company. So for me, if that ever happened, it would be a big opportunity loss, leaving my current career path with promising promotions and joining X’s company in a dead-end team. I was also warned about the attitude of the global heads who would be interviewing me. I was told not to take everything to heart, not to be offended, and to remain calm while receiving their harsh comments or questions. They are global heads and are responsible for big teams and huge amounts of money, so expect them to be more harsh than usual. Not to mention, I knew X’s company from previous years; I myself tried to join on multiple occasions through different channels, but the competition was fierce and I stood no chance (me vs. a PhD in statistics with 10 years of experience being a professor at top universities and then opening and leading a trading desk overseas, this was the level of competition).

Given all the above, you can imagine the mental state I was in before the interview. But I had two goals in mind: I wanted to impress the Head of Trading and the Head of Middle Office. I thought if I could get into either, it would be great. So I prepared a little, practiced some interview questions, and revised some financial concepts. I wasn’t expecting much, but I had nothing to lose, so might as well give it a good shot.

On the first day of Ramadan, the interview began. I introduced myself, shook hands, and sat down. Each one of them had a copy of my CV, and we started. “Oh wow, you studied mathematics! Interesting, tell me about your thesis, I’m curious,” said GHT. To which I explained that I didn’t do a thesis because I wanted to learn mathematics, so I took extra courses instead of doing a thesis, but I can explain my current thesis. He was intrigued, but we were interrupted with, “This is the best CV for an Emirati national I have ever seen,” said GMO. GMO asked me how I managed my education and career when the timelines overlapped. I told him it was a struggle, but I endured by optimizing all aspects of my life during that time. I was able to manage all the stress for the sake of my passion and thirst for knowledge. GHT commented, “I know you enjoyed it.” I laughed and agreed. He then asked me what I can do to reduce aleatoric uncertainty. I replied, nothing since aleatoric means it is inherent in the system. “He knows his stuff, I can confirm that he knows what he is talking about,” he said, talking to GMO. He asked me to explain what I think each department in X does. I gave a brief overview of what I think each team does, and they corrected me, and we started chatting about how all teams are critical as they all need each other. GHT then said he thinks i know my maths well, but he found it strange the I can talk and hold a conversation "This is rare to see". GHT then asked me, if the model outputs with only 5% confidence, what will I do? I thought a bit and said something is wrong with the model, I’ll have to do some testing and debugging. It was clear that this wasn’t the answer he wanted; he repeated the question. I thought a bit and said I apologize for taking long, I’m a bit nervous and wasn’t prepared for this. “A man with your CV should not be nervous,” GMO said. GHT said it’s not a matter of preparation, you have to take a decision. I replied, 5% is nothing, I will ignore the output and rely on something else. “That is the answer I’m looking for,” GHT said, then he continued saying I will be a good fit for either the Trading Desk or The Middle office. The interview time was up. They said if I have any questions I should feel free to contact them directly, and they look forward to the final decision. The HR representative walked me outside, and he was very surprised at what happened, saying this is the first time the interview was this smooth and that I was a perfect fit for them.

I was not able to process what happened; it was like a dream. My colleague then called, who had his interview after me, saying that they were as harsh as we heard. They were very confrontational and not very nice — a totally different experience than what I had. The whole thing was a surprise. I felt high on that interview for days. The contrast between the comments I receive from my current management and what I heard in the meeting was astonishing. I have nothing against my manager, but the skills he focuses on are presentation skills and how to write an email, which is normal for a middle manager. But he takes bureaucracy to the extreme, earning him the title King of Bureaucracy. He always belittled the things I focused on, claiming that technical analysis is engineer work and caring about figures and numbers is analyst work. So in order to elevate myself and get promoted, I should focus on the managerial things that are most critical, like whether the slide background matches the color palette of the graph, or whether the wording of the email conveys a harsh yet cooperative instruction, to always reference appropriate governance structure to point fingers appropriately, or to always say something in any meeting to let everyone know I’m here and contributing instead of actually contributing.

While the interview is only an interview, and I can’t know what the culture there looks like. But I feel so validated. I hope the upcoming chapter is a good chapter in my life and my career. I will hopefully leave the toxic corporate world behind me and embrace the new opportunity as it comes.
